.. _DFTBSplineRep:

SCC-DFTB repulsive potential
===================================
.. currentmodule:: scm.params.parameterinterfaces.dftbsplinerep

The ``DFTBSplineRepulsivePotentialParameters`` class provides an interface to
reading and writing the two-body repulsive potential contained in the `SCC-DFTB
Slater-Koster parameter files
<../../../DFTB/Parameter_files.html#slater-koster-files>`__. An analytical form
of the repulsive function is represented, for example, by a
``TaperedDoubleExponential`` instance, or any other instance inheriting from
``RepulsiveFunction``.

.. note::

   Some DFTB parameter sets (e.g., QUASINANO2015) in the Amsterdam Modeling
   Suite are encrypted. The encrypted parameters cannot be reparameterized with
   ParAMS.

.. seealso::

    Tutorial: :ref:`DFTB_ZnO_Tutorial`

To use this interface, the Slater-Koster files must already contain the
electronic parameters, as well as some repulsive function represented by cubic
splines. When writing a parameter set, the
``DFTBSplineRepulsivePotentialParameters`` instance will write out all
Slater-Koster files, keeping the electronic parts but overwriting the repulsive
potentials.

The names of parameters are of the form ``Element1-Element2:p0``, e.g.,
``O-Zn:p0`` is the first parameter of the analytical repulsive function written
as splines to ``O-Zn.skf``, ``O-Zn:p1`` is the second parameter, etc. For a
``TaperedDoubleExponential``, there are four parameters per element pair.
**Note**: The element names **must** be sorted alphabetically. The function
defined for the element pair ``O-Zn`` will also be written to ``Zn-O.skf``. The
parameters ``Zn-O:p0`` etc. are ignored.

Slater-Koster files that have no active parameters associated with them will be copied, i.e., the original repulsive potential is used.

Example:

.. code:: python

   # Make an interface to the SCC-DFTB repulsive potential parametrization.
   interface = DFTBSplineRepulsivePotentialParameters(
     folder='/amshome/atomicdata/DFTB/DFTB.org/znorg-0-1', # use electronic parameters from znorg-0-1
     repulsive_function=TaperedDoubleExponential(cutoff=5.67), #repulsive potential defined by four parameters
     r_range=np.arange(0., 5.87, 0.1), # distances (in bohr) for which to center the cubic splines
     other_settings=dftb_s # Settings object defining e.g. k-point sampling
   )

   # Refit only the O-Zn and Zn-O repulsive potential parameters
   # All other repulsive potentials from znorg-0-1 (e.g. as defined in C-C.skf) 
   # will be kept in their original form
   for p in interface:    
       p.is_active = p.name.startswith('O-Zn')



DFTBSplineRepulsivePotentialParameters API
--------------------------------------------
.. autoclass:: DFTBSplineRepulsivePotentialParameters
    :exclude-members: __weakref__

TaperedDoubleExponential API
--------------------------------------------
.. autoclass:: TaperedDoubleExponential
    :exclude-members: __weakref__
