.. index:: SM12 
.. index:: Solvation Model 12 
.. _SM12: 


SM12: Solvation Model 12
========================

Continuum solvation can be done with the Minnesota’s Solvation Model 12 (SM12) (`JCTC,9,609,2013 <https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/ct300900e>`__).
Details on the implementation of SM12 in ADF can be found in Ref. (`JCTC,12,4033,2016 <https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jctc.6b00410>`__).
The energetics of solvation is calculated using:

.. math::

   \Delta G_S^\otimes = \Delta E_E + G_P + G_{CDS} + \Delta G_N + \Delta G_{conc}^\otimes

where the symbol :math:`\otimes` denotes an arbitrary choice of standard states, 
:math:`\Delta E_E` is the change in the solute’s internal electronic energy in transferring from the gas phase to the liquid phase at the same geometry,
:math:`G_P` is the polarization free energy of the solute–solvent system when the solute is inserted,
:math:`G_{CDS}` is the component of the free energy that is nominally associated with cavitation, dispersion, and solvent structure,
:math:`\Delta G_N` is the change in :math:`\Delta G_S^0` due to a change in nuclear coordinates,
and :math:`\Delta G_{conc}^\otimes` accounts for the difference in concentrations, if any, in the gas-phase standard state and the solution-phase one.
In case of 1 M concentration in both solution and gas, then :math:`\Delta G_S^\otimes` = 0 kcal/mol, which yields :math:`\Delta G_S^*`.
If the same geometry is used in solution and gas phase calculation, then :math:`\Delta G_N` is zero.

SM12 makes use of the Generalized Born approximation to calculate the bulk electrostatic contribution.
This is comprised of several terms that are together known as the ENP (Electronic, Nuclear, and Polarization) term :math:`G_P`.
The SM12 model in Band uses CM5. CM5 is a class 4 charge model, making use of both empirical and density related terms.
It is comprised of Hirshfeld charges, a simple bond order calculation, atomic distances,
and atom specific parameters.
The covalent radii  utilized are based on the atomic covalent radius from the Handbook of Chemistry and Physics.
The Coulomb integral is described with the use of an approximation from Still et al..
Several parameters go into describing this, which include: inter atomic distance, an empirical Born constant, and the Born area, which is calculated with the Analytical Surface Area (ASA) algorithm.
The Born area is calculated using Legendre-Gauss quadrature from the atomic radii to a sphere that encapsulates the entire molecule.

The ASA algorithm is also used to calculate the solvent accessible surface area (SASA), which is computed within the CDS (Cavitation, Dispersion, Solvation) term of SM12.
The CDS term depends on three terms:

+ SASA (ASA Algorithm)
+ Atomic surface tension
+ Macroscopic surface tension

Atomic surface tension is based on atom-atom distances and the solvent. Macroscopic surface tension is solvent specific.
The SM12 implementation in Band reports energies in an atom specific way. You can attribute exact CDS and polarization energies to each atom in your solute.
The parameters for SM12 are derived to explicitly incorporate organic elements (N, C, O, F, Si, P, S, Cl, Br, I), with less emphasis on non-organics.
Also, while most solvents have a generic atomic surface tension reliance for atoms, water has it’s own explicit set of parameters to better describe it.

Input
-----

The minimal input for the SM12 method is the following: 

.. scmautodoc:: band SolvationSM12 Enabled Solv
   :collapselongchoicesinsummary:

This is the full list of input options for the SM12 method:

.. scmautodoc:: band SolvationSM12
   :collapselongchoicesinsummary:
   :noref:
